>> Richard Feldman: So
why is C still popular?
So, I mean,
the main number one reason is just,
it gives you access to
the maximum possible performance.
This is really because it's
really zero-overhead programming.
It's the ability to get down as close to
the metal as the operating system will
let you, just shy of micromanaging
registers and Assembly.
And not because it does
amazing optimizations,
although it does lots of those two.
It is much more ergonomic than Assembly,
if you've ever tried writing
an Assembly program by hand,
I don't recommend it [LAUGH].
It's an exercise in, well,
it's a learning experience, I'll say that.
And of course,
although C++ was designed to be in
many ways an improvement over C++.
C++ is extraordinarily complicated and
the compile times are massively
longer than they are for C.
So, C is still popular even
in a world where C++ exists,
even though C++ was designed
to be the improvement over C.
Because C++ added so much complexity and
so much longer compile times that a lot of
people are like, yeah,
I know C and C++ and I prefer C.
One really direct example of what C gets
you in terms of performance is what I'm
gonna call the Local Static
HTTP Server Perf Olympics.
This is not a real competition.
This is very unscientific, and it was
done by me very quickly by measuring some
different static HTTP servers and
just loading up a download of
the FrontendMaster's website.
And seeing how fast they were
able to load it into the browser.
Very unscientific, but
also a little bit of fun.
So in third place with the bronze,
we had Node.js.
So this is Node's HTTP server package.
This has about 2.3 million weekly
downloads, it's extremely popular.
It's the most popular way to do a static
HTTP server in the Node.js ecosystem.
In second place with the silver medal,
we have Rust,
Rust's most popular alternative
is simple HTTP server.
Rust's much smaller ecosystem than
Node.js, only 52,000 all-time downloads,
let alone weekly.
And then in first place
with the gold medal,
the fastest local HTTP server among
the ones that I tried is written in C.
And it is the about 300 lines of C code
we write in this workshop with only
the standard library and
no third party dependencies whatsoever.
So this is kind of an example
of why C is still popular.
I mean, granted,
we're not talking about blisteringly
[LAUGH] fast differences here.
It's like, all of these are about under
ten milliseconds of response time to like
load all the different assets statically.
But nevertheless,
it is the case that pretty consistently,
you can see that even though we're not
really like, I didn't sit down and
benchmark this, other than this silly
little performance Olympics thing.
I didn't sit down and
performance optimize the C thing.
These are very mature,
well written, well established,
designed to be high performance
HTTP servers written in Rust.
Which has a reputation for Being a very
fast language, and Node js, which,
granted, has a lot more
overhead than rust or C.
And still, just this example that I just
made for this workshop, just by doing some
basic bread and butter, just do things
the way that kind of C encourages.
We're able to get really, really fast
performance just because C is just really,
really not adding anything,
even compared to Rust, yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Is it Node relying
on C++ anyway as well to do that?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
so Node, under the hood,
certainly the Node runtime is gonna be V8,
and V8 is written in C++.
It's multiple millions of lines [LAUGH] of
C++ code, and billions, it takes forever.
But yes, so when you're running your Node
HTTP server, you are definitely executing
a lot of code that was written in C++,
nearly the JavaScript Virtual Machine, V8.
Yeah, [LAUGH] and nevertheless,
[LAUGH] here we are.
Cool, I do wanna mention there
are some low overhead C alternatives.
We're not gonna get into
them in this course, but
I do wanna at least mention them.
So C++, of course, is like definitely the
most popular of these, very, very complex.
It's absolutely huge, especially in the
game dev space, but not just in game dev.
But if you wanna be a professional
game developer, there is an extremely
high percentage chance that you're
either going to be writing C++ or
at least building on
a large C++ code base.
Rust, definitely a very popular
alternative that's increasing in
popularity a lot.
Nowhere near C++ levels of popularity,
but Zed, like the code editor that
I work on at work, Biome, which is
the successor to Roam written in Rust.
That's like a JavaScript ecosystem thing.
Ripgrep, really popular,
like grep alternative at the command line.
I have a course on FrontendMasters about
that if you wanna learn how to do Rust.
Zig, also very nice language,
you might go see the terminal
emulator bond in the JavaScript ecosystem,
you might've heard of tiger beetle rock.
The programming language I'm making is in
the process as we speak of rewriting our
compiler from rust to Zig.
And there's plenty of other,
this is like D, Odin, JAI, Carbon,
lots of different languages are trying to
say, hey, C has so many nice properties,
but the ergonomics,
there's just some problems with it.
It doesn't feel like a modern language
because it's like half a century old.
And people are trying to modernize it,
hopefully without sacrificing the things
that make it popular in the first place.
Okay, all of these low overhead C
alternatives definitely support C interop.
So, not just languages that are trying to
be C alternatives, but also like we said,
Node.js and others, really,
C interop is almost universal,
because C is like the language that other
languages use to talk to each other.
All things considered, I would say that,
today, in this day and age,
C is the most universal
language that you can know.
If you only wanted to learn one
programming language and you wanted to
know one that will give you the ability to
write code and have it interact with every
other programming language out there,
C is that one language.
And today, we're gonna learn it.
I also wanted to mention very briefly,
so you might see
in the exercises we talk about, it says,
hey, please use either MacOS or Linux, or
if you're on Windows,
use Windows Subsystem for Linux.
I wanted to just briefly mention
why we're doing it that way.
Essentially, we are using in this
course some OS-specific APIs, and
Windows basically just has a totally
different set of APIs for things,
like MacOS and Linux and BSD, BSD,
sorry, MacOS being a flavor of BSD.
These are all different UNIX
derivatives and they all use POSIX,
which is sort of the standard for
UNIX APIs.
Which means that, we can have the code in
the exercises work across all of these.
If we wanted the code in these exercises
to work across Windows, I would have to
do two separate versions of every exercise
and explain the differences between every
single one, and it would just
make everything take way longer.
Fortunately, Windows subsystem for
Linux also supports these POSIX APIs
because it's just a Linux build.
So, basically, I was like, okay,
the windows specific APIs which I have
used are often very, very similar.
So if you go through this course and learn
all this stuff, and then you're like, but
I want to do dedicated Windows
programming, maybe for game development or
something like that.
And I wanna learn the Windows APIs,
I think you'll find that the names
are different, the arguments are slightly
different, but fundamentally,
the concepts here are gonna translate
very, very well to Windows.
It's just gonna be the names and
stuff are just a little bit different.
So you're not missing out on a lot
because we're not doing it in Windows,
but mainly it's gonna
be a big time savings.